.\" Cati manual page
.\" This file is part of cati project
.\" Copyright 2020-2021 parsa shahmaleki <parsampsh@gmail.com>
.TH cati 1 "6 December 2020" "Cati 0.1-alpha3" "Cati Manual"

.SH NAME
cati - Package Manager

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cati
{
help [?
.I command-name
] |
pkg [ show 
.I pkg1.cati
| build
.I pkg1-dir
| install 
.I pkg1.cati
]
| list |
remove
.I pkg1 pkg2
| show
.I pkg1 pkg2=<version>
| state [ --abort, --complete, -y|--yes ]
| query
.I "pkgx >= 4.5"
| search
.I "word"
| files
.I pkg1 pkg2
 | finfo
.I /path/to/file
| rdepends
.I pkg1 pkg2
 | forget
.I pkg1 pkg2=<version>
| check |
repo [-a|--add, -e|--edit, --scan] |
update |
autoremove |
clear-cache |
download 
.I pkg1 --output=<out.cati>
| install
.I pkg1 pkg2
| upgrade |
full-upgrade}
{--version, --help, -v|--verbose, -q|--quiet, --no-ansi}

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cati
is a package manager for UNIX systems. cati can install/remove/list and manage packages on system.
also cati can load packages lists from repositories(local file repositories and http server repositories).
cati is very simple and easy to use and also is powerful.

.B help
shows help.

.B pkg
work with .cati packages.
this command is for
.B show/install/build
package files.
to show package(s), you can run
"cati pkg show pkg.cati /path/to/anotherpkg.cati"
. also this command has options
.I -f|--files
to show package files list. for example
"cati pkg show somepkg.cati --files"
. this option shows list of package files.
another subcommand is
"cati pkg install"
. you can install packages with this command
"cati pkg install somepkg.cati anotherpkg.cati"
. another command is
.I build
. with this command you can build .cati packages.
"cati pkg build /path/to/pkgbuild-directory another-pkg-build-dir/".
`pkg install` command has a option named
.I --without-scripts.
packages has some scripts while install/remove process. in installation process, if you don't want to run scripts,
use this option.
.I --target=[target-path]
is other option for install command.
this option sets target installation path. for example if a package has a file in `/usr/bin/myapp`, if you
set `/some/dir` value on this option, that file will be installed in `/some/dir/usr/bin/myapp`.
.I --keep-conffiles
is other option.
this option says to cati to keep old version of
.B Config files.
config files are a file in package which not be deleted in remove process.
also, if you are installing new version of a package, if conffile is changed in new version, will be replaced
with old version. if you want to keep old version of conffile, use this option.
.I --force|-f
is a option to force install the package if that is blocked in security blacklist.

.B list
shows list of packages.
with this command you can see list of install/loaded packages list.
"cati list [options]".
this command has not argument but has some useful options.
.I --installed
only shows installed packages list.
.I --installed-manual:
only shows
.B Manual
installed packages list
.I --author=[author-name or author-nameS splited by `|`]
filters packages list by author name
.I --maintainer=[maintainer-name or author-nameS splited by `|`]
filters packages list by maintainer name
.I --category=[category-name or category-nameS splited by `|`]
filters packages list by category
.I --search=[word]
searches by packages name and description
.I --upgradable
shows list of upgradable packages

.B remove
removes packages. you can remove installed packages by this command. for example
"cati remove somepkg".
when you run this command, this asks you for continuing process interactive. if you want to say
.B Yes
non-interactive, you can use
.I -y|--yes
option.
"cati remove somepkg anotherpkg -y".
Remember that cati handles dependencies in remove process. means if
.B pkga
has dependency to
.B pkgb
and you are removing pkgb, also pkga will be remove because you removing that's dependency.
also if you want to remove package conffiles(config files are some files will not be removed by default),
you can use
.I --conffiles
option.
also if you don't want to run package
.B remove scripts
you can use
.I --without-scripts
option
.B (We Suggest do not do this. but maybe useful sometimes)
.
also if you want to force remove
.B Essential packages(Essential packages are unremovable packages)
you can use
.I -f|--force
option.

.B show
shows details of packages. for example
"cati show somepkg anotherpkg".
What's different between
.B pkg show
and
.B show
?
actually, "pkg show" command shows a package as file,
but "show" command shows packages information from repositories package lists.
also you can set specify version for packages to show
.B "cati show somepkg=1.6.3 anotherpkg".
also if you want to see versions list of packages, you can use
.I --versions
option.
.B "cati show somepkg --versions"

.B state
manages transactions state. what is transactions state? for example, if you are installing some packages and
process is in progress, and your computer will be shutdown between the process. cati has a system named
.B transactions state
to continue undoned process in next boot. you can manage that with this command.
when you type
.B "cati state"
cati shows undoned transactions.
if you want to ignore undoned transactions, you can run
.B "sudo cati state --abort"
. if you want to complete undoned transactions, you can run
.B "sudo cati state --complete"
and process will be continued.
also you have
.I -y|--yes
option for non-interactive confirmation.

.B query
checks a package query. what is package queries? package query is a string to check a package installation conditions.
for example
.I "pkgx > 2.6"
is a package query. this query checks
.I pkgx
is installed and installed version is upper than
.I 2.6
. also there is
.B >=, <, <=, =
operations.
this system is used for package dependencies and conflicts, but also you can check them with
.B query
command. for example
.B "cati query pkga = 1.0"
.

.B search
search between packages by name and description. for example
.B "cati search <something>"
. this command is alias of
.B "cati list --search=<something>"
.

.B files
shows files list of packages. for example
.B "cati files somepkg anotherpkg"
. also you can set specify version
.B "cati files somepkg anotherpkg=7.3"
. also there is option
.I --installed
to show list of all of installed files on system
.B "cati files --installed"
.

.B finfo
shows info about an file.
for example
.B "cati finfo /path/to/somefile"
this will show
.I /path/to/somefile
file is for which package.

.B rdepends
shows reverse depends list of packages. actually this shows which packages has dependency to this packages.
for example
.B "cati rdepends somepkg anotherpkg=<specify-version>"

.B forget
forgets packages from packages list.
actually, this command deletes a package or specify version of a package from packages list database.
.B "cati forget somepkg anotherpkg=<specify-version>"

.B check
checks system health and security. this command checks packages installation health,
cati database and something else. you can check you system and packages health and security with
this command.
you can use
.I --autofix
option of this command to automatically fix some problems.

.B repo
manage repositories. you can list and edit and add cati repositories.
repositories are a place which cati loads packages list from them and installing packages
from them.
you can use
.I -e|--edit
option to open repositories config file.
.B "cati repo --edit".
also you can add new repo with
.I --add|-a option.
.B "cati repo --add <new-repo>".

.B update
updates list of available packages from repositories.

.B autoremove
remove unused automaticaly installed packages.
if you installed
.B pkgb
and pkgb has dependency to
.B pkgc
and that is installed.
when you remove pkgb, pkgc is not needed.
this command removes all of automatic installed
.B unused(means not any installed packages has not dependency to that)
packages.
you can use all of
.B remove
command options for this command

.B clear-cache
clears cache files.
all of files in
.I /var/cache/cati/

.B download
download packages from repositories.
.B "cati download somepkg anotherpkg=<specify-version>".
also you can use
.I --output|-o
option
.B "cati download somepkg --output=<output-file>"
to set downloaded file path.

.B install
installs packages.
for example
.B "cati install pkga pkgb=<specify-version>".
this command calculates depends and conflicts and downloads packages from repositories and installs them.
you can use
.I -y|--yes
option for non-interactive confirmation.
also use
.I --reinstall
option to reinstall packages. for example
.B "cati install pkga pkgb --reinstall".
also you can use
.I --download-only
option to only download wanted packages.(will not install them and just download in cache)
next if you run command again, packages already is downloaded and will be installed.
you can use this to download packages and install them later.
also packages has a property named
.B Recommended packages
this is like depends but will not be installed by default.
you can use
.I --with-recommends
option to also install recommended packages.
.I without-scripts
option is like `pkg install --without-scripts`.
.I --target=[path]
option is like `pkg install --target`.
.I --keep-conffiles
option is like `pkg install --keep-conffiles`

.B upgrade
upgrade all of packages. this command upgrades all of installed packages to latest available version.
you can use all of
.B install
command options for this command.

.B full-upgrade
update, upgrade and autoremove system

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
cati returns zero exit code when process is successful and returns exit code 1 when there is an error.

.SH AUTHOR
.B parsa shahmaleki <parsampsh@gmail.com>
